 Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences  59 ( 2012 )  71 – 76 
1877-0428 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Selection and/or peer reviewed under responsibility of the UKM Teaching and Learning Congress 2011
doi: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.09.247 
UKM Teaching and Learning Congress 2011 
Communication skills among university students 
Zanaton Haji Iksana*, Effendi Zakariaa, Tamby Subahan Mohd Meeraha,
Kamisah Osmana, Denise Koh Choon Liana, Siti Nur Diyana Mahmuda & Pramela Krishb
aFaculty of Education, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
b School of Language Studies and Linguistics, Faculti of Social Science and Humanities, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
Abstract 
Communication skills is one of the elements of generic skills that are essential among university students. Through their years in 
the university, students would have been exposed to situations, in and outside of the lecture halls, where they have to use their
communication skills, for example group assignments and class presentations. Therefore, the aim of this paper is to investigate
the level of communication skills among university students. Communication skills were measured via a self-administered 
questionnaire and it assessed ten elements in communication skills, including oral, written and social behavior. The reliability of 
the questionnaire was good, with r > 0.08 in each sub construct. The results of this study found that university students have 
achieved good communication skills. 
© 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Selection and/or peer reviewed under responsibility of the UKM Teaching and Learning 
Congress 2011. 
Keyword: Communication skills; generic skills; social communication, verbal and written communication, university students 
1.  Introduction  
The university’s role in producing graduates in various fields to fulfill the market needs does not only focus on 
academic achievement, but also on generic skills or “soft skills” required for them to compete in the global market. 
Furthermore, employers now place great importance on generic skills and personality in choosing their future 
employees. Therefore, local universities now explicitly state generic skills as a requirement in the program outcome 
since 2008, consistent with “performance based curriculum” which started the same year. 
Communication skills are components of generic skills that have been identified as a focus at the universities 
(Kementerian Pengajian Tinggi Malaysia, 2006). Although generic skills encompass several elements, this study 
would focussed on communication skills. Communication skills are important especially during the process of 
seeking job. The new graduate would be tested on their communication during their job interviews. Therefore, 
universities and faculties have to ensure that students are equipped with the ability to communicate clearly and 
* Corresponding author. Tel.:+6-019-6004-627; Fax:+6-03-8925-4372 
E-mail address: naim@ukm.my 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Selection and/or peer reviewed under responsibility of the UKM Teaching and 
Learning Congress 2011 Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
72  
 Zanaton Haji Iksan et al. /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences  59 ( 2012 )  71 – 76 
effectively. This article will discuss the aspects of communication skills that university students have to be equipped 
with before they graduate. 
2.  Literature Review 
Generally, communication can be defined as a process of exchanging information, from the person giving the 
information through verbal and non-verbal methods, to the person receiving the information. The most common 
method of communication is verbal, using a specific language where it is a two-way process, with feedback on the 
message received. Communication also involves the exchange of ideas, opinions and information with a specific 
objective. Apart from oral communication, information can also be exchanged using symbols or signage. 
Communication has also been defined as sharing and giving meaning occurring at the same time through symbolic 
interactions (Seiler & Beall, 2005). Communication has been said to start when a message or information is 
transferred from the sender (the speaker, writer) to the receiver (listener, reader) through an instrument or channel, 
and followed by the receiver giving feedback (coding and interpreting the information; Sulaiman Masri, 1997). 
Based on these definitions, elements of communication include the person giving the information, the information 
and feedback by the receiver, and the repetition of these processes creates knowledge development. 
Previous research on communication skills among university students have been reported by Ihmeideh, Ahmad 
and Dababneh (2010) and Cleland, Foster and Moffat (2005). They found that a positive communication 
environment provides opportunities to students to learn how to communicate, and thus, have better communication 
skills. Therefore, university students need to be given opportunities to communicate in order to be better prepared 
for the job market after their studies. Communication is more effective if the receiver (of the information) can 
understand and practice the skills. Further, communication will be more meaningful if the physical, spiritual and 
social factors are taken into account during the communication process. 
As a university student who is getting ready to start on their chosen career, he or she should take the opportunity 
in any activities that developed communication skills in a wider and complete aspect so that communication skills 
can be fully developed. Students need to put in effort to develop their communication skills to be able to succeed in 
their chosen profession (Ihmeideh, et al. 2010). There are many types of communication skills, but generally it 
involves oral and written skills. Mohd Helmi (2005) proposes that there are essentially three types of 
communication, which are interpersonal communication, management communication (communication in a group), 
and public communication (speech making). 
The process of communication generally involves four elements, which are the speaker, the receiver, 
communication channel and feedback. A few researchers have defined communication as verbal communication, 
written communication, non-verbal communication, listening and giving feedback (Nur’ashiqin Najmuddin, 2010).  
At the same time, Rodiah Idris (2010) proposes that communication as a non-verbal skill, giving feedback, 
presenting ideas verbally and in written form, doing presentations and negotiating to achieve a goal and getting 
support/agreement. In our globalized world, university students need to master communication skills in different 
cultural contexts (Penbek, Yurdakul, & Cerit, 2009). Harlak et al. (2008) proposes that university students be 
exposed to activities that can develop their communication skills starting from their first year at university. Hence, 
universities must provide many more activities to develop the students’ communication skills in order to meet the 
challenges of the globalized world. Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the level of communication 
skills (oral, written and social skills) among local university students. 
3. Methodology 
The questionnaire was developed based on the available literature on communication skills and discussions 
among researchers in the team. The constructs of communication skills (oral skills, written skills and social skills) in 
this paper was determined based on the definitions of communication discussed earlier. Every construct was 
measured based on a few sub-construct that was intern measured by a number of items. Participants responded a 
five-point likert scale: strongly disagree, disagree, slightly disagree, agree and strongly agree. The completed 
questionnaire was then sent to three experts in the field of communication for validation. The validated 
questionnaire was then pilot tested among students which not in the final year, and the Alpha Cronbach of each 
construct and its corresponding sub-construct, is shown in Table 1. 
73
 Zanaton Haji Iksan et al. /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences  59 ( 2012 )  71 – 76 
Table 1. The Alpha Cronbach for each construct 
Construct 
Sub-Construct 
Number of 
items 
Alpha
Verbal
Communication
Skills (V) 
-presenting ideas verbally 
3 
0.87 
-understands what was heard 
4 
0.82 
-giving feedback 
4 
0.87 
-presentation  
5 
0.89 
Written 
Communication
Skills (W) 
-presenting ideas in written 
form
4 
0.91 
-giving feedback in written 
form
5 
0.85 
Social 
Communication
Skills (S) 
-negotiating  to get agreement 
4 
0.88 
-Communicating to people from 
different cultures 
4 
0.90 
-Communicating in different 
languages 
4 
0.81 
-Communicating humbly 
6 
0.90 
Total 
 
43 
 
The Alpha Cronbach of each sub-constructs is between 0.81 – 0.91. This shows good internal reliability. The 
questionnaire was distributed to a total of 533 final year students at Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM) who 
were randomly selected. Data from the questionnaire was analyzed using SPSS (Version 11.5). Frequencies, 
percentages and means were reported for each sub-construct. (Mean range 0-1.67 was categorized as low skill; mean 
range 1.68-3.34 was categorized as having average skills and mean range 2.25-5.00 was categorized as having good 
skills. 
4.  Findings and Discussion 
A total of 533 final year students from UKM were recruited in this study. The demographic details of the 
respondents are shown in Table 2. 
Table 2. Demographic details of respondents 
Demographic 
 
Frequency 
Percent (%) 
Sex 
Male 
186 
34.90 
Female 
347 
65.10 
Age 
20-25 years 
395 
74.10 
> 26 Years 
138 
25.89 
Education Level 
Undergraduate 
484 
91.15 
Post graduate 
47 
8.85 
Discipline  
Social Science 
254 
47.65 
Science 
144 
27.02 
Medicine 
135 
25.33 
Generally, all respondents have studied at UKM for three to four years. They have completed various activities 
and assignments that contributed to the development of their communication skills, which was explicitly or 
implicitly planned by the university and the individual lecturers. Therefore, students should demonstrate good skills 
in all sub-constructs of communication skills. Figure 1 shows the level of skills in each sub-construct of 
communication skills. 
74  
 Zanaton Haji Iksan et al. /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences  59 ( 2012 )  71 – 76 
Figure 1. Level of communication skills for each sub-category 
4.1 Verbal Communication 
This research focuses on verbal communication skills, written skills and social skills. Based on Figure 1, it can be 
concluded that final year students from UKM have good communication skills, with the mean ranging from 3.89 to 
4.09. Looking at the sub-constructs, the social skills have the highest score, followed by verbal communication 
skills, and written skills. Around 20.0 – 27.3% of the respondents were found to have low listening skills, written 
skills, and presentation skills and make conclusions while communicating with others.  
Verbal communication skills can be developed and nurtured through activities such as presentations, open 
discussions in a class or group. Further, verbal communication skills can also be practised outside of the classroom 
through interviews. The sub-construct “presenting ideas verbally” have the lowest mean (3.89) compared to other 
sub-constructs although it should be the skill most used by students during tutorials, group discussions and 
presentations.  
Verbal communication needs two parties to work at the same time, while one is presenting his/her ideas, the other 
must listen and give feedback. This skill also did not have a very high mean score (3.90). Listening skills can be 
presented as showing interest and attention to what is being said although not necessarily showing agreement. 
Students need to show a readiness to listen and give attention while other people are talking and giving 
presentations. With that, they will be able to remember what has been presented, identify the key issues and give 
meaning to what was presented. The listener must also be able to appreciate the thoughts and feeling of the one 
giving the information.  
Presentation is an academic activity that is used often in class. The results showed that students can do 
presentations confidently using current technologies. Apart from that, the presenter needs to have public speaking 
skills. 
4.2 Written Communication 
Written communication skills have a high mean score (3.94). This aspect of communication skills was developed 
through completing written assignments and reports through their academic program at the university. Good written 
communication skills are measured through the clarity of the writing, the flow of the arguments, using simple and 
easy to understand sentences, and written using academic writing style. A written communication also involved two 
parties, with the receiver giving feedback, but they do not necessarily have to communicate at the same time. Giving 
75
 Zanaton Haji Iksan et al. /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences  59 ( 2012 )  71 – 76 
written feedback can be measured through the ability to translate an idea and give meaning through written work. At 
the university level, written information should be in multiple languages, specifically English and Bahasa Melayu 
(BM). This study found that the level of competency to communicate (verbally and written form) in English was 
lower compared to the competency to communicate in BM [BI (85.10%): BM (92.05%)]. This result is consistent 
with the findings of Masita Misdi et al. (2010), where she reported that the level of competency in the English 
Language among students at institutions of higher learning in Malaysia is not satisfactory.  
4.3  Social Communication 
The third construct of communication skills is social communication. There are four sub-constructs for social 
communication, which are negotiating, language, culture and be politeness. The sub-construct negotiates need the 
students to be able to discuss in various languages and cultural settings. This type of communication must be carried 
out humbly and politely. This can be practised during group discussion for a group project or assignment that 
consists of group members from different social and cultural background. Students need to discuss and negotiate the 
course of the project where everyone agrees upon. Another skill that is important in being able to communicate is to 
be able to initiate a discussion, able to take criticism, giving cooperation and able to make concise conclusions on 
the discussions. This study found that negotiating skills still need to be improved among university students, 
compared to the sub-construct culture, language and be politeness. Social communication also involves 
interpersonal communication, which is the ability to conduct face-to-face interactions. This type of communication 
involves the ability to cooperate and negotiate with people from different background (Ihmeideh et al. 2010). This 
type of communication also involves social management skills.  
Although the overall communication skills among university students are good, there are still certain aspects that 
are not up to the expectations of potential employers (Masitah Misdi, et al. 2010). Therefore, skills under a few sub-
constructs that need to be improved. Communication skills should be cultivated in every course and lecturers must 
play a more significant. Lecturers must give constructive feedback on students’ presentations and communication 
skills wherever possible. On the other hand, students must actively participate in every activity that develops their 
communication skills.  
Ilmeideh et al. (2010) reported that the attitudes towards communication skills among university students are 
high. This means that it is easier for universities to develop their communication skills through appropriate 
activities. Positive environments for communication provide opportunities for students to practise their 
communication skills and participate in active learning. With this, lecturers should create as many learning activities 
as possible to stimulate the provide opportunity for students to practice and horn their communication skills. 
5.  Conclusion 
The constructs and sub-constructs of communication skills are skills that students should equip themselves with 
before they venture into the working world. These three skills can be combined and incorporated into the learning 
process. Students not only get to develop their communication skills through discussions and presentations in class, 
but also get to familiarize with communication situations in the real world. Therefore, we must all keep pushing and 
improving ourselves to help our university students to develop and horn their communication skills that is essential 
towards their future career development. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia for providing the research grant UKM-PTS-125-2010. 
References 
Cleland, J., Foster, K., & Moffat, M. (2005). Undergraduate students' attitudes to communication skills learning differ depending on year of study 
and gender. Medical Teacher, 27(3), 246-251. 
Harlak, H., Gemalmaz, A., Gurel, F. S., Dereboy, C., & Ertekin, K. (2008). Communication skills training: Effects on attitudes toward
communication skills and empathic tendency. Education for Health: Change in Learning and Practice, 21(2). 
76  
 Zanaton Haji Iksan et al. /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences  59 ( 2012 )  71 – 76 
Ihmeideh, F. M., Ahmad, A., & Al-Dababneh, K. A. (2010). Attitude toward communication skills among students' teachers' in Jordanian Public 
Universities. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 35, 1-11. 
Kementerian Pengajian Tinggi Malaysia. (2006). Modul Pembangunan Kemahairan Insaniah (Soft Skills) untuk Institusi Pengajian Tinggi
Malaysia. Penerbit Universiti Putra Malaysia. 
Nur'ashiqin Najmuddin. (2010). Instrumen kemahiran generik pelajar pra-universiti berasaskan penilaian oleh pensyarah. Tesis yang tidak 
diterbitkan,  Doktor Falsafah, Fakulti Pendidikan, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia. 
Masita Misdi, Mohammad Pauzi Mokhtar, Mohamad Ali & Mohd Yusop Hadi. (2010). Kepentingan elamen kemahiran berkomunikasi pelajar
kejuruteraan Awam mengikut keperluan majikan.  
Mohd. Helmi Abd Rahman. (2005) Kemahiran Komunikasi. In Perkembangan Profesional Ahli Akademik, edited by Siti Rahaya Ariffin, Shahrir 
Abdullah and Abd. Ghafur Ahmad. Malaysia: Pusat Pembangunan Akademik. 
Penbek, S., Yurdakul, & D., Cerit, A. G. (2009). Intercultural communication competence: A study about the intercultural sensitivity of 
university students based on their education and international expriences. Kertas kerja ini telah dibentangkan di European and Meditteranean 
Conference on Information System 2009.  
Rodiah Idris. (2010). Pemeriksaan Ciri-ciri Psikometrik dan Pembentukan Penanda Aras Pentadbiran Kemahiran Genarik. Tesis yang tidak
diterbitkan,  Doktor Falsafah, Fakulti Pendidikan, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia. 
Seiler, W. J., & Beall, M. L. (2005). Communication: Making connections (6th. ed). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
Sulaiman Masri. (1997). Media dan Komunikasi dalam Bahasa Melayu. Malaysia: Fajar Bakti. 
